# **GMsh/XDMF/DOLFIN mesh processing pipeline**

# **Abstract**

Finite element methods require a discretization of a domain into small elements, called a mesh. Typically, users of DOLFIN use an external mesh generation package, such as gmsh to construct meshes, before reading them into DOLFIN. In this project, we will work to ensure that[gmsh](http://gmsh.info/), DOLFIN, and our preferred visualization package,[Paraview](http://paraview.org/) work seamlessly together. This will be a huge usability improvement for users working with very complex geometries.

# **Technical Details**

There are two possible paths that could be taken in this project:

1. Modify gmsh to directly support[XDMF](http://www.xdmf.org/index.php/XDMF_Model_and_Format) format files. DOLFIN directly supports reading and writing XDMF.
2. Contribute to and improve[meshio](https://github.com/nschloe/meshio) a package for converting between different mesh file formats, e.g. gmsh&#39;s .msh and .xdmf

# **Schedule of Deliverables**

**May 6th - May 27th, Community Bonding Period**

- Get completely familiar with the code architecture of FEniCS, especially DOLFIN.
- Get familiar with the code architecture of gmsh.
- Study about the data structures of gmsh&#39;s MSH, and, XDMF.
- Discuss with my mentor and the FEniCS community on the topic and decide on the approach to be followed for the project.

**May 27th - May 31st**

- Start working on improving the read and write capabilities of meshio.
- Parallelly, start working on the generation of documentation for the functionalities added to the code.
- Modifications should be supported with unit tests.
- I would start documenting my progress by writing a blog post on a weekly basis on my [](https://computationalmechanics.in/author/iitrabhi/)

**June 3rd - June 7th**

- Start work on meshio gmsh\_io and xdmf\_io modules. The modifications should be in accordance with the current data structures of gmsh&#39;s MSH and XDMF files formats.

**June 10th - June 14th**

- Further work on meshio&#39;s gmsh\_io and xdmf\_io modules.
- Generate test cases for newly added functionalities.

**June 17th - June 21st**

- Test the XDMF file generated by the modified meshio modules with FEniCS and Paraview and look for shortcomings in the current implementation.

**June 24th - June 28th, End of Phase 1**

- The goal at the end of phase 1 is to have enhanced i/o modules to handle gmsh&#39;s MSH and XDMF files.
- Blog about how the user can use gmsh and meshio for the creation of mesh and how to use the generated mesh in FEniCS for analysis.

**July 1st - July 5th, Begin of Phase 2**

- Examine how currently FEniCS handles the data structures in XDMF.
- Compare the structure of XDMF file output by the modified meshio modules to that of FEniCS.
- Start working n meshio&#39;s xdmf\_io module to incorporate the results of the study above.

**July 8th - July 12th**

- Examine how currently Paraview handles the data structures in XDMF.
- Look for any conflicts in the XDMF data structures of FEniCS and Paraview and try to resolve the same.

**July 15th - July 19th**

- Further work on meshio&#39;s xdmf\_io module.
- Generate test cases for newly added functionalities.

**July 22nd - July 26th, End of Phase 2**

- Finalize changes made to meshio, xdmf\_io modules.

**July 29th - August 2nd, Begin of Phase 3**

- Finalize linking gmsh,meshio,fenics and paraview.
- The following functionality should be working flawlessly:
  - Conversion of a MESH file type having all the possible tags provided by gmsh to an XDFM format supported by FEniCS.
  - Solving a Poisson&#39;s problem on the imported XDMF mesh.
  - Exporting the results to XDMF format and visualization with Paraview.

**August 5th - August 9th**

- Check the whole pipeline for any possible bugs and fix the same.

**August 12th  - August 16th**

- Make a documented demo of the Poisson&#39;s problem explaining the workflow of preparation of mesh in gmsh, conversion from .msh to .XDMF file type using meshio, performing analysis with FEniCS and then finally visualization using Paraview.
- Write a blog explaining how the current system can be used for analysis and visualization using sample geometries.

**August 19th - August 23rd, Final Week**

- Work on code cleaning and testing and fixing the code for any possible bugs.
- Work on finalizing the documentation of the work carried out.

**August 26th, Submit final work**

- Submission of the work for final evaluation.

# **Future works**

My research topic is related to FEM, and I would be extending my work to the field of Iso-Geometric Analysis (IGA). The idea of IGA is to use B-spline basis functions for representing both geometry and field variable. I would try to extend the support of FEniCS to B-spline based meshes that could then be utilized to perform IGA.

# **Development Experience**

- I am currently working on the development of a computational platform for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) using the concept of IGA.
- I have worked for five years at Nuclear Power Corporation of India as a scientific officer, mainly developing various in-house code for design of nuclear structures. I have worked there in VBA, OpenSTAAD, MATLAB, and Python.
- My master&#39;s thesis was based on FEM where I had utilized Python for preparation of the finite element model and postprocessing of data in ABAQUS.
- In my bachelor&#39;s thesis, I have extensively worked with MATLAB and VBA. I had developed a toolbar in Microsoft Excel using VBA and OpenSTAAD library for faster processing of STAAD Pro output.
- In high school, I had developed the software &quot;Fee Management System&quot; using DBMS language FOXPRO.
- I have a [minor pull request in meshio](https://github.com/nschloe/meshio/pull/374).
- I have a [minor pull request in dolfinx.](https://github.com/FEniCS/dolfinx/pull/375)

# **Other Experiences**

I am a second-year Ph.D. student at [Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India](https://www.iitr.ac.in/). In my free time, I love to do web development and I have built a [website for my lab](https://computationalmechanics.in). I have previously worked as a scientific officer at the Nuclear Power Corporation of India. I also have a working knowledge of the object-oriented framework of JAVA, Python, and C++. My [resume](https://computationalmechanics.in/rajib_teams/abhinav-gupta/) shows the details of my work and work experience.

# **Why this project?**

I came across FEniCS when I was researching for an open source tool to carry out FEA. FEniCS was the only computational platform that provided excellent documentation and made it really easy to work with. I would like to extend the capabilities of FEniCS to NURBS based FEA in the future, which requires a deeper understanding of the working of this software, especially how it handles the mesh structure. Working on this project would give me a chance to collaborate with its creators and help me understand the working of this software.

# **Workload and summer plans**

I plan to devote 8 hrs daily to work on this project. I don&#39;t have any summer plans other than GSoC.

# **Appendix**

My webpage: [https://computationalmechanics.in/rajib\_teams/abhinav-gupta/](https://computationalmechanics.in/rajib_teams/abhinav-gupta/)
